---
title: "Ancient DNA In The Modern World"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2017-11-08-esa
venue: "The Colorado Convention Center"
date: 2017-11-08
location: "Denver, Colorado"
---
The Annual Entomological Society of America meeting is a huge event. I was thrilled to be invited by Eric Gordon and Michael Forthman to talk about degraded DNA at a special symposium "Breaking into the Biobank: Promising Methods for Sequencing DNA from Museum Arthropod Specimens". 

## Abstract
   Ancient DNA (aDNA) studies use DNA from archaeological, paleontological,
museum, or any other degraded samples for eco-evolutionary research. DNA degradation and
contamination are the most important problems in this field. The extent of aDNA
preservation varies with the type of environment. The most successful DNA recovery has
been shown for permafrost-preserved bones and samples from dry caves. Furthermore, the
amount of authentic aDNA could be negligible in comparison to exogenous contaminant
DNA. Different strategies, such as sodium hypochlorite pretreatment, were developed for de-
contamination. Additional efforts are made to keep the working environment clean, varying
from dedicated UV-cabinets to sterile rooms.  
   The content of digestion buffer as well as post-digestion strategy depends on the type
of biological material. Protocols are usually optimized for recovery of highly fragmented and
short DNA molecules. If fragment length allows, aDNA extract then can be used for PCR
amplification. For short fragments, alternative approaches exist: next-generation sequencing
of total genomic DNA and\or targeted enrichment for mitogenomes or other regions of
special interest.  
   Bioinformatic analysis of the data depends on the final goal of the project, however,
all approaches make special attention to the nature of aDNA and include a thorough
assessment of quality and content of aDNA extract.  
   Regardless of the obstacles, aDNA is one of the most fast-growing and blooming
fields of evolutionary biology that has proven to be useful for many areas of systematics and
phylogeography. Ancient DNA approach is promising for entomology and studies in other
arthropods.

## Links
[check out my slides here](../files/ESA-Entomology2017_compressed.pdf)  
[other talks from this symposium](https://vimeo.com/channels/1324294/videos)
