---
title: "Evolution and extinction of caballine horses in Ice Age Beringia"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2019-06-27-napc
venue: "The HUB"
date: 2019-06-27
location: "Riverside, California, USA"

---

2019 North American Paleontological Convection is a famous meeting gathering paleontologists from all over the States. I was excited to be invited by  Jeana Drake and Dave Jacobs to open the 'Ancient DNA and Fossil Proteins' session with the talk about NSF-funded research of Pleistocene equids "**Evolution and extinction** **of caballine horses in Ice Age Beringia**". 

**Abstract**

Arctic mammals are highly vulnerable to the effects of climate-associated fluctuations on habitats. Shifts in habitat productivity and availability have potentially broad evolutionary consequences by both creating and destroying barriers to dispersal for many species. Here, we explore the influence of the Bering Land Bridge on the evolution and diversification of caballine horses, *Equus caballus*, during the Late Pleistocene. We use four high-coverage nuclear paleogenomes, including two new paleogenomes that we isolated from a collection of 30,000- and 33,000-year-old horses found in Klondike, Canada’s Yukon Territory. These represent the first high coverage ancient horse paleogenomes from North America. Using coalescent simulations on a set of genome-wide SNPs, we infer that the ancestors of North American and Eurasian *E. caballus* diverged around one million years ago. After this divergence, the evolution of horses on both continents continued in the presence of extensive gene flow across the Bering Land Bridge. Our results provide new insights into the role of barriers to gene flow in shaping genetic diversity and mitigating extinction risk.

**Links**

https://napc2019.ucr.edu/